CHAPTERS XI AND XII Of the Gospel According to St. Luke
In the Authorized Version Commonly Known as the King James Translation
And it came to pass, that as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of
his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples.
And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be
thy name, Thy kingdom come, thy will be done, as in heaven so in earth.
Give us day by day our daily bread, and forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one that
is indebted to us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight,
And say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves, for a friend of mine in his journey has come
to me, and I have nothing to set before him.
And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not, the door is now shut, and my children
are with me in bed, I cannot rise and give thee.
I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet because
of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.
And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it
shall be opened unto you.
For every one that asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh,
it shall be opened.
If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone?
Or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?
Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?
If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?
And he was casting out a devil, and it was dumb, and it came to pass when the devil was
gone out, the dumb spake, and the people wondered.
But some of them said, He casteth out devils through bales above the chief of the devils,
and others tempting him sought of him a sign from heaven.
But he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself
is brought to desolation, and a house divided against a house falleth.
If Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand?
Because ye say that I cast out devils through bales above.
And if I by bales above cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out?
Therefore shall they be your judges.
But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you.
When a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace.
But when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he taketh from him
all his armor wherein he trusted, and divideth his spoils.
He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathereth not with me scattereth.
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places seeking rest,
and finding none he saith, I will return unto my house whence I came out.
And when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished.
Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself.
And they enter in, and dwell there, and the last state of that man is worse than the first.
And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice,
and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked.
But he said, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.
And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say, This is an evil generation.
They seek a sign, and there shall no sign be given it but the sign of Jonas the prophet.
For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of Man be to this generation.
The Queen of the South shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation,
and condemn them. For she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon,
and behold a greater than Solomon is here. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in the judgment
with this generation, and shall condemn it. For they repented at the preaching of Jonas,
and behold a greater than Jonas is here. No man when he hath lighted a candle putteth it in a
secret place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which come in may see the
light. The light of the body is the eye. Therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole body also is
full of light. But when thine eye is evil, thy body also is full of darkness. Take heed therefore
that the light which is in thee be not darkness. If thy whole body therefore be full of light,
having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle
And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him, and he went in, and sat down to
meet. And when the Pharisees saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner. And
the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter,
But your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. Ye fools, did not he that made that
which is without make that which is within also? But rather give alms of such things as ye have,
and behold all things are clean unto you. But woe unto you Pharisees, for ye tithe the
minth and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God. These ought
ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Woe unto you Pharisees, for ye love
the uppermost seats in the synagogues and greetings in the markets. Woe unto you scribes
and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them
are not aware of them. Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying
thou reproaches us also. And he said, Woe unto you also ye lawyers, for ye laid men with burdens,
grievous to be born, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers. Woe unto you,
for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers kill them. Truly ye bear witness that
ye allow the deeds of your fathers, for they indeed kill them, and ye build their sepulchres.
Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and apostles, and some of them
they shall slay and persecute. That the blood of all the prophets which was shed from the foundation
of the world may be required of this generation. From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias,
which perished between the altar and the temple, verily I say unto you, it shall be required of
this generation. Woe unto you lawyers, for ye have taken away the key of knowledge. Ye entered
not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered. And as he said these things unto them,
the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of
many things, laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth that they
might accuse him. Chapter 12 In the meantime, when there were gathered together an innumerable
multitude of people, insomuch that they trod one upon another, he began to say unto his disciples,
first of all, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. For there is
nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid that shall not be known. Therefore
whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light, and that which ye have spoken
in the ear, in closets, shall be proclaimed upon the housetops. And I say unto you, my friends,
be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I
will forewarn you whom ye shall fear. Fear him which after he hath killed hath power to cast
you into hell. Yea, I say unto you, fear him. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings,
and not one of them is forgotten before God? But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
Fear not, therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows. Also I say unto you,
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of Man also confess before the angels of
God. But he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of God. And whosoever
shall speak a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him. But unto him that blasphemeth
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the synagogues,
and unto magistrates and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer,
or what ye shall say. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.
And one of the companies said unto him, Master, speak to my brother that he divide the inheritance
with me. And he said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or divider over you? And he said unto them,
Take heed, and beware of covetousness, for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance
of the things which he possesseth. And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain
rich man brought forth plentifully. And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do,
because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, This I will do, I will pull down my
barns and build greater, and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my
soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.
But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee,
then whose shall those things be which thou hast provided?
So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.
And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life,
what ye shall eat, neither for the body, what ye shall put on. The life is more than meat,
and the body is more than raiment. Consider the ravens, for they neither sow nor reap,
which neither have storehouse nor barn, and God feedeth them. How much more are ye better
than the fowls? And which of you, with taking thought, can add to his stature one cubit?
If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought for the rest?
Consider the lilies, how they grow, they toil not, they spin not. And yet I say unto you,
that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
If then God so clothe the grass, which is today in the field and tomorrow is cast into the oven,
how much more will he clothe you, O ye of little faith? And seek not ye what ye shall eat or what
ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind. For all these things do the nations of the world
seek after, and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things. But rather seek ye the kingdom
of God, and all these things shall be added unto you. Fear not, little flock, for it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms, provide yourselves
bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth,
neither moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. And ye yourselves like unto men that
wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding, that when he cometh and knocketh,
they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord, when he cometh,
shall find watching. Verily I say unto you that he shall gird himself and make them to sit down
to meet, and will come forth and serve them. And if he shall come in the second watch,
or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.
And this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what hour the thief would come,
he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through.
Be therefore ready also, for the Son of Man cometh at an hour, when ye think not.
Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or even to all?
And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler over
his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? Blessed is that servant whom his
Lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing. Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler
over all that he hath. But, and if that servant say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming,
and shall begin to beat the men's servants and maidens, and to eat and to drink and to be drunken,
the Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for him, and at an hour when he is
not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.
And that servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his
will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But he that knew not, and did not commit things worthy
of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall
be much required. And to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.
I am come to send fire on the earth, and what will I if it be already kindled?
But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished?
Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth, I tell you nay, but rather division.
For from henceforth there shall be five in one house, divided three against two, and two against
three. The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father, the mother
against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother, the mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law,
and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. And he said also to the people,
When ye see a cloud rise out of the west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower, and so it is.
And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat, and it cometh to pass. Ye
hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth, but how is it that ye do not
discern this time? Yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?
When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the way,
give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him, lest he hail thee to the judge,
and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee into prison.
I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid the very last might.
CHAPTERS XI AND XII OF THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE
IN THE AUTHORIZED VERSION, COMMONLY KNOWN AS THE KING JAMES TRANSLATION
READING BY FATHER ZILEY OF DETROIT, OCTOBER 2008